Oliger Disk Board "A" is the real disk interface board in this system and Oliger Disk Board “B" can be thought of as a Basic guage sl ee board containing its own 8K of eprom and 8K of ram space. JLO SAFE Disk Basic is a _ firmware program written by John Oliger to extend 2068 and Spectrum Basic in support of the real disk interface Board “A’. Commands added via use of Disk Board "B" do not really need to have anything at all to do with the disk interface proper. An example of this is the LET /P=0 command, which ties firmware within the "B” eprom to the regular printer channel, allowing instant use of the Oliger or Aerco printer I/F without a LOAD required. Disk Board “B" could in fact be used by itself without Disk Board “A” and the printer support would still work correctly. It would be possible for the user himself to add additional commands in the same manner that JLO SAFE does. The JLO SAFE Disk Basic disassembly may be used as an example as to how to do this by the experienced m programmer or by somebody who simply wants to see what he can do. following details concerning Disk Board "B" along with the JO as disassembly should be a valuable aid in this type of endeavor:

ANY opcode fetch (Ml NOT active) from memory locations 0008-00Fh or 0068-006Fh will turn on or enable this "B" bank of eprom/ram. Any NON opcode fetch read from this same area (Ml NOT inactive) will cause this "B" bank to be switched off or become disabled. (Actually, a memory write to this region would also disable the "B” bank too, but this is not recommemed because doing so would conflict with use of the Oliger 2068 Eprom Programmer) If the instruction JP 1000 were at location 0008 in the "B” eprom, the "B" bank would turn on when the C3 opcode for JP was fetched, then turn back off again when the 00 10 data bytes were fetched, because Ml NOT would not be active when these two bytes were fetched. If me instructions that do not require data bytes are used, the bank stays on and the instructions are executed correctly. This is why there is a RST28H at location 0009 in the SAFE eprom. A CALL or JP instruction could simply not

used in this critical area from OO008-O00Fh (or from 0068-O06Fh). To turn off the "B" bank, the instruction LD A, (0008) is generally used at the lowest level of returning to the ec hea bank of memory, usually with a PUSH AF preceeding this

a POP AF, EI, and RET located in the HOME and Spectrum roms following the LD A,(0008) instruction in "B” bank. The very next instruction executed after LD A,(0008) will be in the bank of memory currently active underneath the “B" bank.

When the "B" bank is enabled, it has higher priority than any other bank of memory on the 2068 computer including 2068 memory expansion boards available later. When the "B" is disabled the next highest priority bank will regain control. This will normally be the Dock (if using a Spectrum Fnulator or Jia eta other LROS cartridges that modify the operation of the 2068) or Exrom (but it is usually disabled via OFEX in SAFE if it was active) and if neither of these are active then the Home bank will normally be enabled.

These last details were given only to explain the _ lowest levels of operation when in the "B" bank. Using JLO SAFE, the entry points at O008-O00F and 0068-O06F are already taken care of , RST18h and RST20h can readily be used to jump to or call routines in the Spectrum, Timex, or Exrom. To use RST18h, you need only insure that the bank desired to return to is currently active under the "B" bank (via ports F4 & FF), PUSH the desired address to be jumped to on the machine stack, and then perform a RST18h. The restart will get control of the computer to _ the address pushed in the other bank, reenable interrupts (interrupts are always disabled when the "B" bank is active), and clear the stack back to the word prior to your PUSH of the destination address. All registers will be preserved in doing this. To use the RST20h CALL Timex, Exrom, or Spectrum rom routine, again you need only push the desired address to CALL on the stack, insure that the bank desired is prepared to be active when the “B" bank is turned off, (via ports F4 & FF) and perform the RST20h instruction. Interrupts will be enabled, control passed _ to the desired address in the next lower priority bank, (normally the Timex or Spectrum Rom) and on the next instruction the ‘B" board will again gain control, interrupts disabled, and control passed to the next address following your RST20h instruction. All registers will be preserved both to and from the destination routine. If an error occurs in the Basic rom called, control will NOT normally be returned to the "B" shadow bank.

Any routine contained within the SAFE eprom can be accessed from outside the 0-16K area by simply turning on the ‘“B” bank using CALL OOOA, the desired routine accessed directly via another CALL or the "B” bank’s ram manipulated as_ desired, and then turning off the "B" bank by using the RST18h instruction instead of the RET instruction when done. This way, interrupts will be disabled and then reenabled when finished as required by the SAFE eprom.

Regarding the main disk interface Board “A’, this circuit is a very straightforward implementation of a WD1//0 based disk interface board. The WD17/0 data sheet is really necessary to even start to understand how to communicate with and deal with this somewhat intelligent disk controller chip. I/0 port 8Fh is used to read the status register and write to the command repister of this chip. Port 9Fh is used to read and write to_ the 1770°s TRACK register, port AFh reads/writes to its SECTOR register, and port BFh reads/writes to its DATA register. The last port used on this interface is port B/h, which is a ‘write only" port. Bit 6 of port B/7h is the double/single density select bit. A zero here selects double density mode and a one will select single density mode. JLO SAFE ALWAYS uses double density mode. Bi 7 of port B/h selects the side of the disk currently active on a double sided drive. A zero here will select side zero and a one will select side one. Bits O-3 of port B/h selects drive 0-3 respectiveyy if high. Bits 4 and 5 of port B/ are not used, nor is the INPUT port B7 at all. ALL ports used on Oliger Disk Boards are fully decoded. I believe in following the computer manufacturer“s lead in this area. Timex fully decoded all of its 1/0 peers on the TS2068, so ALL I/O products for the 2068 from John Oliger Co. are and will be fully decoded.

JLO SAFE Disk Basic FORMATS all disks to have ten 512 byte sectors per track. This will make a standard IBM type 40 track double sided drive have 400K formatted capacity. $§ uses 5K of the Stolae for file 0 and the disk’s CATalog, so a 40 track double sided disk would end up with 395K of free disk storage area available for use. On many drives you can actually format at a slightly higher maximum trac than the drive is rated at, amd if this is done SAFE can and will use the extra space. You can do this by using the LET /T=n command before a FORMAT / command. I can personally get 43 tracks from my Tandom ITMI00-2 drives leaving 425K of free formatted space on a disk after a format and 84 tracks from my CDC "80 track quad density” drives leaving 835K of free formatted jhe after a FORMAT. The mmber of tracks a particular disk is formatted at is stored in the CATalog area, so the system will know the number of tracks available on the disk

future use of this particular disk without using the LET /7=n ommand again.

Na ele is allocated in 5K (the size of one track on one side) " nders" by JLO SAFE. JLO SAFE does not use a bit mapped allocation table, but stores pointers into the file area within the CATalog area itself on track 0. Disk othe efficiency is gitgntly sactitteed for increased speed and simplicity 4 JLO SAFE. s results in a faster LOAD/SAVE time than mst DOS and less chance of complex “bugs” to be found by the user under certain untried conditions because the structure to so _ much simpler than many Disk Operating Systems.

In a ABS state type SAVE/LOAD, 48 1/2K of data is actually sent or retrieved from the disk (3E00 to FFFFh). Thus the last 1/2K of ram in the "B" bank is saved to disk along with the actual file. Anything that may be needed upon reLOADing, such as Stack Pointer, is copied into the area of ‘B" ram that will be SAVEd before the actual transfer os ba During a NMI SAVE, ALL registers are stored in this area along with control flags the contents of video control port FFh. This information is used when re-LOADing to return the state of the machine to be exactly as it was when originally SAVEd.

There is no sector to sector "SKEW" on a disk formatted with JLO SAFE Disk Basic, but there is a track to track sector skew of three to allow for head settling time when the disk steps in to the next track within a file. Because each sector takes 20ms_ to

ss by the head, this will give 40ms + header and intergap time or the drive to step in am settle. JLO SAFE allows with software a minimum of 30ms for the head to settle, along with the actual head step rate time unused in stepping the head itself. If the slowest head step rates are used, the disk will have already eens the beginning sector and another entire revolution of the isk will be mde before starting to LOAD from a new track. This means that with slow head step rates set via the LET /H=n command, 200ms+ is actually allowed for head settling time. If a drive isnt fast enough to handle THIS you should certainly start looking for another drive! JLO SAFE will ALWAYS restore to track zero and then step back out to the required track when LOADing or SAVEing. This makes any mechanical movement of the head when the controller is not directly in control redundant, and adds very little to the time required to access the disk itself. The eh elad "time waster" in LOADing or SAVEing to disk is used in allowing for disk spin-up (so that the disk is sure to be oe at the correct speed without "wow" from its speed controller circuitry). JLO SAFE uses the WD17/0°s own tion to allow 6 revolutions of the disk (a little over a second) before doing anything unless the disk is already spinning. is very generous amount of time should be sufficient for even the most archaic of drives to be found today.

Files are arranged on the disk in logical order. The CYLinders are accessed on alternating sides of the disk on a double sided drive to keep head movement to the minimum required to store or retrieve the data. Files are physically located on the outermost cylinders available and space is allocated working into the center of the disk. The effect of this is that the most reliable space (the outer part of the disk) is used first before any use of the less reliable inner tracks is made. Inless a disk is completely full, the very innermost tracks (which are the mst un are never used.